#summary IS module description

<wiki:toc max_depth="2" />

= Introduction =

This page describes the functions provided by the IS module. This IS module supports the access to information systems. More specifically, the following information systems are currently supported:

  * MySQL
  * TDS (Sybase, SQL Server via FreeTDS)
  * SQLite3

== Example ==

{{{
-- Import
require "is"
require "is.mysql"

-- Define database
DB = {
    driver = is.mysql,
    user = "me",
    password = "secret",
    database = "mydatabase",
    charset = "utf8"
}

-- Connect
conn = is.connect(DB)

-- Create table
conn:execute("CREATE TABLE IF NOT EXISTS DUMMY (I INTEGER NOT NULL AUTO_INCREMENT PRIMARY KEY, V INTEGER NOT NULL)")

-- Insert rows
for i = 1, 10 do
    conn:execute("INSERT INTO DUMMY (V) VALUES (?)", i)
end

-- Read
conn:execute("SELECT * FROM DUMMY WHERE V > ?", 5)
sum = 0
for row in conn:rows() do
    sum = sum + row.V
end
conn:execute("SELECT COUNT(*) FROM DUMMY WHERE V > ?", 5)
row = conn:read("index")
cnt = row[1]
}}}

= Import =

{{{
require "is"
}}}

== MySQL ==

{{{
require "is.mysql"
}}}


== TDS ==

{{{
require "is.tds"
}}}

== SQLite3 ==

{{{
require "is.sqlite3"
}}}

= Functions =

The functions described in this section are common to all information systems.

== `is.connect (table)` ==

Creates and returns a connection to an information system using the connection arguments supplied in `table`. `table` must contain a field `driver` that determines the type of information system to connect to. Other required fields depend on the driver and are documented in the respective sections below. The function returns a connection if it is successful, and raises an error otherwise.

== `connection:close ()` ==

Explicitly closes the connection. Connections are closed implcitly when they are garbage collected.

== `connection:execute (sql, ...)` ==

Prepares the supplied SQL statement which may contain binding variables represented by `?`, and then binds the values following the SQL statement to these variables. If the SQL statement modifies rows (such as in `INSERT`, `DELETE`, `UPDATE`), the function returns the number of rows affected; if the SQL statement produces rows (such as in `SELECT`), the function returns no value.

== `connection:read ([read_mode])` ==

Reads the next row produced by the previously executed SQL statement and returns that row as a table, or `nil` if there are no more rows. If `read_mode` is absent or `name`, the table keys are column names; if `read_mode` is `index`, the table keys are column numbers.

== `connection:rows ([read_mode])` ==

Returns three values such that the production

{{{
for row in connection:rows ([read_mode]) do body end
}}}

iterates over all rows produced by the previously executed SQL statement. The `read_mode` parameter has the same meaning as in `connection:read()`.

== `connection:metadata (meta_data)` ===

Returns meta data from a previously executed SQL statement that produces rows. The function returns a table where keys are column numbers (1-based) and values depend on `meta_data` as follows:

|| *`meta_data`* || *Description* ||
|| `name` || column name||
|| `type` || column data type expressed in the type system of the information system ||
|| `length` || column length, size or precision ||
|| `scale` || column scale ||
|| `luatype` || mapped Lua type, such as `string`, `number`, or `boolean` ||

The function must not be invoked after `connection:read()` or the iterator function returned by `conection:rows()` have returned `nil`.

== `connection:intransaction ()` ==

Returns whether there is an open transation on the connection.

== `connection:begin()` ==

Begins a transaction on the connection. The function raises an error if there already is an open transaction.

== `connection:commit()` ==

Commits an open transaction on the connection. The function raises an error if there is no open transaction.

== `connection:rollback()` ==

Rolls back an open transaction on the connection. The function raises an error if there is no open transaction.

= MySQL Specific Functions =

== Type Mapping ==

The following type mapping is specific to MySQL:

  * `bit(1)` is mapped to and from `boolean`
  * `bit(n)` is mapped to and from a number suitable for Lua bit libraries (1 < `n` <= 32)

== Connection Arguments ==

The MySQL driver supports the following connection arguments:

|| *Field* || *Optional* || *Description* ||
|| `driver` || no || must be `is.mysql` ||
|| `host` || yes || the host to connect to ||
|| `user` || yes || the user to connect as ||
|| `password` || yes || the password to use ||
|| `database` || yes || the database to use ||
|| `port` || yes || the port to connect to ||
|| `unix_socket` || yes || the Unix socket to connect to ||
|| `charset` || yes || the charset to use for the connection ||

== `mysql_connection:insert_id()` ==

Returns the auto increment number generated by the previously executed `INSERT` statement on the connection.

== `mysql_connection:execute_direct(sql)` ==

Executes an SQL statement without preparing it first. This function must be used for a very limited set of SQL statements, such as `LOCK TABLES` for which MySQL does not support preparing. If the SQL statement modifies rows, the function returns the number of rows affected; if the SQL statement produces rows, the result set is discarded, and function returns no value.

= TDS Specific Functions =

== Type Mapping ==

The following type mapping is specific to TDS:

  * `bit` is mapped to and from `boolean`
  * `date`, `time`, `datetime` and `smalldatetime` are mapped to the `YYYY-MM-DD HH:MM:SS` string format

== Connection Arguments ==

The TDS driver supports the following connection arguments:

|| *Field* || *Optional* || *Description* ||
|| `driver` || no || must be `is.tds` ||
|| `server` || no || the server to connect to; this is a logical server name that is defined in the FreeTDS configuration ||
|| `user` || no || the user to connect as ||
|| `password` || yes || the password to use ||
|| `database` || yes || the database to use ||
|| `application` || yes || the name of the connecting application ||
|| `workstation` || yes || the name of the connecting workstation ||
|| `charset` || yes || the charset to use for the connection ||

== `tds_connection:messages()` ==

Returns a table value with number indexes containing the messages returned by the server for the last function called on the connection.

= SQLite3 Specific Functions =

== Type Mapping ==

SQLite 3 uses a [http://www.sqlite.org/datatype3.html dynamic type system] with type affinity. The dynamic type of values may be different from the static type returned by `connection:metadata()`.

== Connection Arguments ==

The SQLite3 driver supports the following connection arguments:

|| *Field* || *Optional* || *Description* ||
|| `driver` || no || must be `is.sqlite3` ||
|| `filename` || no || the file containing the database ||
|| `readonly` || yes || whether to open the database in read-only mode; default: read-write ||
|| `nocreate` || yes || whether to raise an error if the database does not exists; default: create it ||
|| `vfs` || yes || the name of the virtual file system to use ||

== `sqlite3_connection:last_insert_rowid()` ==

Returns the row ID generated by the previously executed `INSERT` statement on the connection.